
These samples demonstrate how to do a few things with the Meanwhile
library. Some of these are also tools which can be used to help in
debugging and obtaining protocol information.



Examples
========

 socket.c

Compile with `make socket`. This is the simplest possible client. All
it does is connect and authenticate to a host (specified on the
command line). Most of the code is dedicated to performing I/O.


 echo.c  (forthcoming)

Compile with `make echo`. This extends on the socket example above,
but introduces the use of the IM service. All incoming messages will
be echo'd verbatim back at whomever sends them. Can anger co-workers.


 pipe.c  (forthcoming)

Compile with `make pipe`. Extending upon the echo example, but is
slightly more amusing and can be possibly useful for scripting. Will
output all incoming IM messages to stdout. Listens on stdin and will
write each line from stdin back to anyone who sent us a message
(responding in order received)

Since this application uses stdout, glib logging is smothered.


 blist_storage.c  (forthcoming)

Compile with `make blist_storage`. An example of the Storage service
and buddy list parser. Operates in two modes, up and down. In up mode,
this sample will read a buddy list file on stdin, check it for
validity, then upload it to the storage service. In down mode, this
sample will fetch the buddy list from the storage service and write it
to stdout.

Since this application uses stdout, glib logging is smothered.



Utilities
=========

 redirect_proxy.c

Compile with `make redirect_proxy`. Acts as a redirecting sametime
server; any client attempting to connect to the socket this utility
listens on will be instructed to redirect its connection to an
alternative host (which is specified on the command line). Useful for
ensuring client code can handle redirects correctly when there's no
real redirecting server to test against.


 nocipher_proxy.c

Compile with `make nocipher_proxy`. Acts as a sametime server proxy,
passing messages between a real client and server. However, it will
intercept and mangle channel creation messages to ensure that they
will not be used with encryption. This will cause many clients to fail
in strange places (where they demand encryption), but is useful for
getting some messages from a service in the clear. Will print all
messages in hex pairs to stdout using the hexdump utility. This may be
more useful than using ethereal, as it will actually group its output
by message rather than by receipt from the TCP stream.

